A BILL FOR AN ACT
To establish a Non-Profit Organization Tax Credit to incentivize
individual and corporate contributions, promote philanthropic
engagement, and ensure the long-term viability of organizations
that provide essential services and enhance the quality of life for
the people of the CNMI.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE 24TH NORTHERN MARIANAS
COMMONWEALTH LEGISLATURE:
Section 1. Short Title. This Act shall be known and may be cited as the
"Non-Profit Organization Tax Credit Act of 2025."
Section 2. Findings and Purpose. The Legislature finds that non-profit
organizations are the backbone of the social and economic fabric of the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. These organizations provide
indispensable services, address pressing community needs, and significantly
enhance the overall quality of life for residents. Their dedicated efforts foster
community development, create meaningful opportunities for advancement, and
improve the well-being of all citizens, playing an indispensable role in supporting
a thriving and resilient CNMI.
The Legislature finds that this Act is committed to cultivating a culture of

2a
HOUSE BILL 24-
giving, strengthening local community services, and promoting the long-term
sustainability of non-profits across the Commonwealth. By promoting a 25%
increase in contributions, it will catalyze a transformative influx of resources for
vital initiatives and ensure that these organizations can continue serving the public
effectively.
To achieve these vital goals, the Legislature asserts that the Non-Profit
Organization Tax Credit Act will not only promote philanthropy but will also
enhance community services and secure the enduring viability of non-profits
throughout the CNMI. This legislation is designed to empower both individuals and
businesses to contribute generously to qualified non-profits, thereby significantly
enhancing their capacity to address diverse community needs.
The Legislature further finds that this Act is essential for empowering
organizations that uplift our society. By nurturing a culture of responsible giving
and stewardship, the Act will inspire non-profits to expand their outreach, innovate
in service delivery, and serve as catalysts for positive, lasting change, benefiting all
residents and securing a prosperous future for the CNMI.
Section 3. Enactment. The following provisions are hereby enacted into
law as a new Chapter 15, titled "Non-Profit Organization Tax Credit Act" of
Division 1, Revenue and Taxation, Title 4: Economic Resources, of the
Commonwealth Code:
"Chapter 15. Non-Profit Organization Tax Credit Act
-

HOUSE BILL 24- gi
§ 100. Short Title. This chapter may be cited as the Non-Profit
Organization Tax Credit Act of 2025.
§ 101. Definitions.
(a) "Non-Profit Organization" means an organization that meets all of the
following criteria:
(1) Is exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
(2) Is registered and operating in the CNMI, in accordance with the
requirements of Commonwealth Administrative Code, Title 20,
Subchapter 20-50.2.
(3) Any Non-Profit Organization located in the Commonwealth
which has been issued a Letter of Determination granting tax-
exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the IRC by the
Division of Revenue and Taxation prior to the date of the
donation for which the tax credit is taken.
(4) Has obtained a charter from the Department of Commerce, as
required by Commonwealth Administrative Code, Title 20,
Subchapter 20-50.2, specifically outlined in § 20-50.2-101.
(5) Is in good standing with the Department of Commerce, having
fulfilled all filing and reporting requirements.
(b) "Qualifying Contribution" means a cash donation made to a qualifying

HOUSE BILL 24- id
non-profit organization.
(c) "Taxpayer" means any individual or business entity subject to CNMI
income tax.
§102. Tax Credit.
(a) A taxpayer shall be entitled to a credit against their CNMI income tax
for qualifying contributions made to eligible non-profit organizations during the
taxable year, where the amount of the credit shall be 50% of the qualifying
contribution, not to exceed $2,500 for individuals and $5,000 for businesses.
(b) Taxpayers are eligible to claim the Non-Profit Tax Credit for
contributions to 501(c)(3) registered organizations within the CNMI, provided they
file all necessary forms and reports and fulfill all necessary requirements during the
taxable year.
(c) To ensure transparency and accountability, non-profit organizations
shall include their Non-Profit Tax Identification Number on all relevant forms, and
each organization shall provide periodic reporting on received qualifying
contributions and their utilization, in a manner and frequency prescribed by
regulation, to promote public accessibility and oversight.
(d) The total amount of tax credits available under this Act shall be subject
to an annual aggregate limit established by regulation. Any unused credit may be
carried forward for up to five taxable years, with credits granted on a first-come,
first-served basis.
-

VI
HOUSE BILL 24-
§103. Reporting Requirements.
a. Taxpayers claiming the Non-Profit Tax Credit must promptly submit
comprehensive documentation of their contributions, including official
receipts from non-profit organizations and any other pertinent
information as mandated by the Division of Revenue and Taxation.
b. Non-profit organizations must provide their donors with detailed
receipts that include the organization's name, registered address, tax
identification number, date of contribution, and amount contributed.
c. All documentation must be submitted within 30 days following the end
of the taxable year to ensure timely processing and compliance.
§ 104. Rules and Regulations.
The Department of Finance shall promulgate comprehensive rules and
regulations necessary to effectively implement and administer this Act, in close
coordination with the Department of Commerce, relevant non-profit organizations,
and community stakeholders. These regulations shall be consistent with existing
laws governing non-profit organizations in the CNMI, including but not limited to
Commonwealth Administrative Code, Title 20, Subchapter 20-50.2. The
Department of Finance shall finalize and publish these regulations within six
months of the enactment of this Act, establishing a clear framework for
accountability and responsiveness to the community's needs."

HOUSE BILL 24- git
Section 4. Severabilitv. If any provisions of this Act or the application of
any such provision to any person or circumstance should be held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Act or the application of its
provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid
shall not be affected thereby.
Section 5. Savings Clause. This Act and any repealer contained herein
shall not be construed as affecting any existing right acquired under contract or
acquired under statutes repealed or under any rule, regulation, or order adopted
under the statutes. Repealers contained in this Act shall not affect any proceeding
instituted under or pursuant to prior law. The enactment of the Act shall not have
the effect of terminating, or in any way modifying, any liability, civil or criminal,
which shall already be in existence on the date this Act becomes effective.
Section 6. Effective Date. This Act shall take effect upon its approval by
the Governor, or its becoming law without such approval.
Prefiled: /60 U90,5-
Date: Introduced by:
Re r4 Joseph A. Flors
Reviewed for Legal Sufficiency by:
Hçftse Legal Counsel
-/
Date:
