SB552 -ASINTRODUCED
2026SESSION
26-2149
12/09
SENATEBILL
ANACT permitting classification of individuals based on biological sex under certain
limitedcircumstances.
COMMITTEE: Judiciary
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
ANALYSIS
This bill provides a definition for "biological sex" and provides that certain designations by
biologicalsexdonotconstituteunlawfuldiscrimination.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Explanation: Matteraddedtocurrentlawappearsinbolditalics.
Matterremovedfromcurrentlawappears[inbracketsandstruckthrough.]
Matterwhichiseither(a)allnewor(b)repealedandreenactedappearsinregulartype.

SB552-ASINTRODUCED
26-2149
12/09
STATEOFNEWHAMPSHIRE
IntheYearofOurLordTwoThousandTwenty-Six
ANACT permitting classification of individuals based on biological sex under certain
limitedcircumstances.
BeitEnactedbytheSenateandHouseofRepresentativesinGeneralCourtconvened:
1 State Commission for Human Rights; Law Against Discrimination; Purpose and Scope.
AmendRSA354-A:1toreadasfollows:
354-A:1 TitleandPurposesofChapter.
I. This chapter shall be known as the "Law Against Discrimination." It shall be deemed an
exercise of the police power of the state for the protection of the public welfare, health and peace of
the people of this state, and in fulfillment of the provisions of the constitution of this state
concerning civil rights. The general court hereby finds and declares that practices of discrimination
against any of its inhabitants because of age, sex, gender identity, race, creed, color, marital status,
familial status, physical or mental disability, or national origin are a matter of state concern, that
such discrimination not only threatens the rights and proper privileges of its inhabitants, but
menaces the institutions and foundation of a free democratic state and threatens the peace, order,
health, safety and general welfare of the state and its inhabitants. A state agency is hereby created
with power to eliminate and prevent discrimination in employment, in places of public
accommodation and in housing accommodations because of age, sex, gender identity, race, creed,
color, marital status, familial status, physical or mental disability, or national origin as herein
provided; and the commission established hereunder is hereby given general jurisdiction and power
for such purposes. In addition, the agencies and councils so created shall exercise their authority to
assurethatnopersonbediscriminatedagainstonaccountofsexualorientation.
II. The general court also finds that, notwithstanding New Hampshire’s
fundamental commitment to treat all persons without discrimination and with equal
dignity and respect, which commitment the legislature fully accepts and strongly endorses,
there are certain limited circumstances in which classification of persons based on
biological sex is proper because such classification serves the compelling state interests of
protecting the privacy rights and physical safety of such persons and others. The
legislature finds that permitting classification of persons based upon biological sex serves
thiscompellingstateinterestinthe3circumstancesdescribedinRSA354-A:25-a.
2 New Section; State Commission for Human Rights; Miscellaneous Provisions; State
Recognition of Biological Sex. Amend RSA 354-A by inserting after section 25 the following new
section:
354-A:25-a StateRecognitionofBiologicalSex.

SB552 -ASINTRODUCED
-Page2-
I. Nothing in RSA 5-C:87, RSA 260 through RSA 263-A, RSA 354-A, or any other law or
regulation shall mean that it is unlawful discrimination based on sex or gender identity for any
person or organization, public or private, to classify based on biological sex with respect to the
followingmatters:
(a) In the construction, maintenance, operation, and use of lavatory facilities or locker
rooms designed for usage by multiple persons at the same time, even if such facilities have
individualurinals,stalls,orsimilarapparatus.
(b) In athletic or sporting events or competitions in a sport or similar activity in which
physical strength, speed, or endurance is generally recognized to give an advantage to biological
males.
(c) In the operation, maintenance, and use of facilities designed for usage as prisons,
housesofcorrection,juveniledetentionorcommitmentcenters,mentalhealthhospitalsortreatment
centersandlikefacilitiestowhichpersonsmaybecommittedinvoluntarily.
II. “Biological sex” shall mean the male and female biological sexes. This section does not
mean that any public or private entity is required by state statute to separate persons based upon
biologicalsex.
3 EffectiveDate. Thisactshalltakeeffect60daysafteritspassage.
