5Mar2026...1054h
2026SESSION
26-2729
12/06
1442-FN
HOUSEBILL
ANACT limiting the use of certain facilities on the basis of sex and redefining the term
"genderidentity."
Peternel, Carr. 6; Rep. McGrath, Rock. 40; Rep. Popovici-Muller, Rock. 17; Rep.
Sabourin dit Choiniere, Rock. 30; Rep. Mazur, Hills. 44; Rep. DeVito, Rock. 8;
Rep.Love,Rock.13;Sen.Birdsell,Dist19;Sen.Avard,Dist12;Sen.Gannon,Dist
COMMITTEE: Judiciary
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
AMENDEDANALYSIS
Thisbill:
I. Modifiesstatutoryconstructionoftheterm"genderidentity".
II. Requires bathrooms and locker rooms in public schools and municipally owned buildings to
beusedonthebasisofsex.
III. Permits owners and operators of places of public accommodation to restrict the use of
bathroomsandlockerroomsonthebasisofsex.
IV. Requires that inmates in New Hampshire correctional facilities be housed separately on the
basisoftheirsex.
V. Modifies the enforcement of civil rights to provide protections on the basis of gender identity
onlyforcertainpurposes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Explanation: Matteraddedtocurrentlawappearsinbolditalics.
Matterremovedfromcurrentlawappears[inbracketsandstruckthrough.]
Matterwhichiseither(a)allnewor(b)repealedandreenactedappearsinregulartype.

5Mar2026...1054h 26-2729
12/06
STATEOFNEWHAMPSHIRE
IntheYearofOurLordTwoThousandTwenty-Six
ANACT limiting the use of certain facilities on the basis of sex and redefining the term
"genderidentity."
BeitEnactedbytheSenateandHouseofRepresentativesinGeneralCourtconvened:
1 StatementofFindings. Thegeneralcourtfindsthat:
I. Historically, society has protected females by reserving certain spaces for their exclusive
useandofferingcertainservicesonlytowomenandchildren.
II. The inclusion of gender identity in the Civil Rights Act and the New Hampshire law
againstdiscriminationwasnotintendedtoremoveprotectionsforfemales.
III. Thefollowingstatutorychangesaretobeundertakenbythegeneralcourt:
(a) Include "female" and "male" in the definitions section of New Hampshire state law,
using biology to determine the legal categories of female and male. To address intersex persons, the
language references the SRY gene which is required during fetal development to develop male
anatomy. To remove the need for genetic testing, those persons who do not meet the legal definition
offemalewillbeconsideredmale.
(b) Amend the definition of "gender-identity" to provide clarification on what is
considered "improper purpose" for assertion of gender identity. Accessing spaces or services offered
onlytofemalesonthebasisofgenderidentityshallbedefinedasanimproperpurpose.
(c) Allinmatesshallbehousedbaseduponsex.
2 StatutoryConstruction;Number;Gender;SexAdded. AmendRSA21:3toreadasfollows:
21:3 Number; Gender. Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things; words importing the plural number may include the singular; and words
importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females. "Sex," "biologic sex," and
"biologicalsex"shallmeanmaleorfemale.
I. "Female" is defined as an individual with a reproductive system of the type which
in normal function produce ova, and specifically defined as an individual who lacks a
functional Y chromosome. A functional Y chromosome is a Y chromosome which expressed
the SRY gene during fetal development. A person with 46,XX/46,XY and functional ovarian
tissueisafemale.
II. "Male" is defined as an individual with a reproductive system of the type which
in normal function produce sperm. Male shall include any person who does not meet the
definitionoffemale.
III. The terms "woman" and "girl" shall mean "female" and the terms "man" and
"boy"shallmean"male":

-Page2-
(a) Forthepurposesofseparatingpeoplebysexorgenderforreasonsofmodesty
andsafety;
(b) Whenreferringto"womenofchildbearingage"orsimilar;
(c) ForfemaleinspectorsasdesignatedinRSA277:33;
(d) Forprogramsandservicesintendedatthetimeofformationtoservefemales
totheexclusionofmalesincludingbutnotlimitedto:
(1) Women'shealthcareasdescribedRSA417-D;
(2) For women housed in the department of corrections established in RSA
21-H;
(3) Women,infantsandchildrenassistance;
(4) Women'sorgirl'ssports;and
(5) Bathrooms,lockerrooms,andchangingrooms.
IV. In common use, an individual's sex is described by the sex listed on an
individual's official birth certificate issued at or near the time of the individual’s birth
unless there is medical reason to support the claim that a person who is male or female as
describedabovewasnotidentifiedasthecorrectsexonhisorherbirthcertificate.
V. Except as otherwise provided in this section, gender-specific [Gender-specific]
terms relating to the marital relationship or familial relationships, including without limitation,
"spouse," "family," "marriage," "immediate family," "dependent," "next of kin," "man," "woman,"
"groom," "bride," "husband," "wife," "widow," or "widower," shall be construed to be gender-neutral
for all purposes throughout New Hampshire law, whether in statute, state administrative or court
rule,policy,commonlaw,oranyothersourceofcivilstatelaw.
3 StatutoryConstruction;GenderIdentityModified. AmendRSA21:54toreadasfollows:
21:54 Gender Identity. "Gender identity" means aperson's gender-related identity, appearance,
or behavior, whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior is different from
thattraditionallyassociatedwiththeperson'sphysiologyor[assigned]sex[atbirth]. Gender-related
identity may be shown by providing evidence including, but not limited to, medical history, care or
treatment of the gender-related identity, consistent and uniform assertion of the gender-related
identity, or any other evidence that the gender-related identity is sincerely held as part of a person's
core identity provided, however, that gender-related identity shall not be asserted for any improper
purpose. Notwithstanding any other laws including but not limited to RSA 193, sections 38
through 40, RSA 354-A, and RSA 354-B, it shall be considered improper purpose to assert
that gender identity provides access to any place or service provided or offered exclusively
tofemalesormales.
4 StateCommissionforHumanRights;Definitions;GenderIdentityModified. AmendRSA354-
A:2,XIV-etoreadasfollows:

-Page3-
XIV-e. "Gender identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior,
whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance, or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the person's physiology or [assigned] sex [at birth]. Gender-related
identity may be shown by providing evidence including, but not limited to, medical history, care or
treatment of the gender-related identity, consistent and uniform assertion of the gender-related
identity, or any other evidence that the gender-related identity is sincerely held as part of a person's
core identity provided, however, that gender-related identity shall not be asserted for any improper
purpose. Notwithstanding any other laws including but not limited to RSA 193, sections 38
through 40, RSA 354-A, and RSA 354-B, it shall be considered improper purpose to assert
that gender identity provides access to any place or service provided or offered exclusively
tofemalesormales.
5 New Section; School Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use byDesignated Biological Sex. Amend
RSA189byinsertingaftersection16-athefollowingnewsection:
189:16-b School Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use by Designated Biological Sex.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, with the exception of RSA 21:3, RSA 21:54, and
paragraph II below, all multi-user facilities, including bathrooms, restrooms, and locker rooms
located in any public school, chartered public school, public academy, or other school building
governedbythischaptershallbeusedbasedontheindividual’sbiologicalsex.
I. Forthepurposesofthissection:
(a) "Sex"shallmeaneitherfemaleormaleasdefinedbyRSA21:3.
(b) "Multi-user facility" shall mean any bathroom, restroom, or locker room that is
accessibletomultipleindividualsforuseatthesametime.
(c) "All-gender"shallmeananyfacilitywithaccessnotrestrictedbysex.
II. Adoption or enforcement of a policy pursuant to this section shall not be deemed
discriminationunderRSA354-Aoranyotherstatelaw.
6 New Section; Municipal Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use by Designated Biological Sex.
AmendRSA31byinsertingaftersection103-bthefollowingnewsection:
31:103-c Municipal Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use by Designated Biological Sex.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, with the exception of RSA 21:3, RSA 21:54, and
paragraph II below, all multi-user facilities, including bathrooms, restrooms, and locker rooms
located in buildings owned, leased, or operated by any municipality shall be used based on the
individual’sbiologicalsex.
I. Forthepurposesofthissection:
(a) "Sex"shallmeaneitherfemaleormaleasdefinedbyRSA21:3.
(b) "Multi-user facility" shall mean any bathroom, restroom, or locker room that is
accessibletomultipleindividualsforuseatthesametime.
(c) "All-gender"shallmeananyfacilitywithaccessnotrestrictedbysex.

-Page4-
II. Adoption or enforcement of a policy pursuant to this section shall not be deemed
discriminationunderRSA354-Aoranyotherstatelaw.
7 New Section; Places of Public Accommodation; Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use by
DesignatedBiologicalSex. AmendRSA354byinsertingaftersection17-athefollowingnewsection:
354-A:17-b Bathrooms and Locker Rooms; Use by Designated Biological Sex. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law with the exception of RSA 21:3 and RSA 21:54, the owner or operator of
any place of public accommodation, as defined in RSA 354-A:2, XIV, may require that all multi-user
bathrooms, restrooms, and locker rooms under their control be used based on the individual’s
biologicalsex.
I. Forthepurposesofthissection:
(a) "Sex"shallmeaneitherfemaleormaleasdefinedbyRSA21:3.
(b) "Multi-user facility" shall mean any bathroom, restroom, or locker room that is
accessibletomultipleindividualsforuseatthesametime.
(c) "All-gender"shallmeananyfacilitywithaccessnotrestrictedbysex.
II. Adoption or enforcement of a policy pursuant to this section shall not be deemed
discriminationunderRSA354-Aoranyotherstatelaw.
8 New Section; Inmates Designated By Biological Sex. Amend RSA 622 by inserting after
section10thefollowingnewsection:
622:10-a Inmates Designated by Biological Sex. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
inmatesshallbehousedbasedontheindividualinmate'sbiologicalsex.
I. Forthepurposesofthissection:
(a) "Inmate"shallmeanapersoncommittedbylawtothecustodyofthecommissionerof
the department of corrections, a person in pretrial confinement, any person incarcerated in a local
detentionfacilityoperatedbyacountydepartmentof corrections, orapersonindetentionat apolice
department.
(b) "Sex"shallmeaneitherfemaleormaleasdefinedbyRSA21:3.
II. This section shall apply to all correctional and detention facilities established and
operatedpursuanttoRSA21-HandRSA30-B.
9 Civil Rights Act; Enforcement; Gender Identity Restriction. Amend RSA 354-B:1 to read as
follows:
354-B:1 CivilRightsEnforcement.
I. All persons have the right to engage in lawful activities and to exercise and enjoy the
rights secured by the United States and New Hampshire Constitutions and the laws of the United
States and New Hampshire without being subject to actual or threatened physical force or violence
againstthemoranyotherpersonorbyactualorthreateneddamagetoortrespassonpropertywhen
such actual or threatened conduct is motivated by race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sexual orientation, sex, gender identity asserted with proper purpose, or disability. "Threatened

-Page5-
physical force" and "threatened damage to or trespass on property" is a communication, by physical
conduct or by declaration, of an intent to inflict harm on a person or a person's property by some
unlawfulactwithapurposetoterrorizeorcoerce.
II. It shall be unlawful for any person to assert that their gender identity is a sex
other than that defined in RSA 21:3 for the purposes of accessing places or services
restrictedonthebasisofsex.
III. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere with the rights
securedbythischapter.
10 EffectiveDate. Thisactshalltakeeffectuponitspassage.

LBA
26-2729
3/6/26
HB1442-FN-FISCALNOTE
ASAMENDEDBYTHEHOUSE(AMENDMENT#2026-1054h)
ANACT limiting the use of certain facilities on the basis of sex and redefining the term
"genderidentity."
FISCALIMPACT:
Estimated State Impact
FY2026 FY2027 FY2028 FY2029
Revenue $0 $0 $0 $0
RevenueFund None
Expenditures* Indeterminable
FundingSource GeneralFund
Appropriations* $0 $0 $0 $0
FundingSource None
*Expenditure=Costofbill *Appropriation=Authorizedfundingtocovercostofbill
Estimated Political Subdivision Impact
FY2026 FY2027 FY2028 FY2029
CountyRevenue $0 $0 $0 $0
CountyExpenditures Indeterminable
LocalRevenue $0 $0 $0 $0
LocalExpenditures Indeterminable
METHODOLOGY:
This bill adds, deletes, or modifies a criminal penalty, or changes statute to which there is a
penalty for violation. Therefore, this bill may have an impact on the judicial and correctional
systems, which could affect prosecution, incarceration, probation, and parole costs, for the state,
as well as county and local governments. A summary of such costs can be found at:
https://gencourt.state.nh.us/lba/Budget/Fiscal_Notes/JudicialCorrectionalCosts.pdf
AGENCIESCONTACTED:
Judicial Branch, Judicial Council, Department of Justice, Department of Corrections, New
HampshireAssociationofCounties,andNewHampshireMunicipalAssociation
